As much as we all can laugh and mock
the, "Oh gosh, they're financing
burritos." [music] When you put your
credit card down at your favorite
burrito, you are financing that burrito,
too. You may be personally paying it off
at the end of the month,
>> but half the country is paying interest
to their credit card provider. That
burrito gets right on top of that pile
and immediately starts acuring interest.
The sort of a, oh gosh, a new way to
borrow money. Let's stick with the old
one because it's better is pretty
disingenuous.
This week on Bold Names, serial
entrepreneur Max Levchin. You might know
him as one of the co-founders of a
company that became PayPal. And for the
past decade or so, he's been at the
company of firm. Max started the buy now
pay later company to try to make credit
more transparent and therefore less
risky. Beex, thank you for joining us on
Bold Names. You have been in the fintech
space for most of your adult life.
You've been heading up a firm since its
creation in 2012. Really becoming one of
the darlings in the buy now pay later
space. That buy now pay later, it's not
necessarily a new idea, right?
Installment payments were really made
popular the Great Depression and kind of
lost uh the favor as we saw the rise of
the credit cards years later. I'm
curious, how did you think you could
innovate in this space and what was
motivating you? Why why why go into that
area?
>> So two personal events actually shaped
the foundation for the founding of the
company. So I came to the US as a
teenager from what was Soviet Union and
as a semi-independent adult I tried to
buy a car and was declined even though
this happened right after we took my
first successful startup aka PayPal
public. So, I was independently wealthy,
>> had a lot of money, millions of dollars,
>> very successful.
>> I I did well. I did all right. And um
yet an auto dealer in LA told me, "Your
credit score is so low. I'm not going to
sell you this car unless you pay cash,
which is what I did." But the reason I
had such a low credit score wasn't
entirely just due to the fact that I was
a recent immigrant and had no history.
I'd managed to get myself in real
trouble getting a credit card in
college, not fully understanding how it
worked, missing minimum payments,
getting into a 90-day delinquency, and
basically just completely wrecking my
credit history and score. I'd sort of
become more and more motivated to build
a product that 18-year-old, fresh off
the boat, immigrant max, would
understand and actually feel good about
using that. That that's where our farm
came from. But now because of a lot of
the work you all have done, buy now pay
later is becoming a force out there. The
market size projected for this year is
around half a trillion dollars according
to Deote. They think it could be a
trillion dollars, close to a trillion
dollars by 2030. You've got more than 24
million users. How do those transactions
work?
>> It's pretty simple. Every transaction
for a firm always begins with an active
thought of I'm going to buy a thing and
I'd like to borrow money to pay for it.
With a firm, before you consummate the
transaction, you actually see the
payment schedule. You understand what it
will cost you. You confirm that you do
plan to use it. And then the transaction
completes. you get the thing that you
were buying and then we will bill you
typically 30 days after this event.
>> What's the typical transaction size and
what what's the typical thing people are
buying?
>> The average transaction size for us is
about $270 plus or minus and it's just
sort of trended down as people have been
using the product in more and more
places. Obviously, the average
transaction out there is much much
lower. We're not especially commonly
used for things like lunches,
>> right? That's one of the big criticisms,
right, that people are buying burritos
with these things.
>> I do not believe a firm is used to
finance burritos. Uh we are primarily
used to finance things like bicycles,
couches,
>> Mhm.
>> electronics.
>> I mean, it's easy to use. I bought a
couch a few years ago using a firm. Uh
the idea of using cash for such a
purchase really kind of hurt my head,
but ignoring my wife's uh desire to have
a new couch probably would have meant
that I was sleeping on the old one. So,
I turned to a firm. Really the big draw
was the direct to consumer seller which
was kind of emerging about seven or
eight years ago becoming very popular
had this very neat offer right it was
zero interest uh I think it was over a
year's time and I could see the payments
every month I think it even came out
automatically
um out of my debit card or my checking
account. What was the pitch to merchants
early on to make this work? Why why were
they willing to kind of go uh into
business with you?
I think you almost
reproduced a pitch just from your
personal history. So, you want to sell
it as a merchant to this consumer who's
hesitant to put their credit card down
for whatever reason. You know, maybe
it's the 18-year-old Max confused about
how credit cards work. Maybe it's a much
more experienced consumer who says,
"Look, I don't love revolving. Revolving
is expensive and I have no idea when
I'll be out of debt."
>> Revolving mean they don't pay it off at
the end. It keeps going turning over
monthto month.
>> Yeah. They they acrew interest upon
interest upon interest. Interest of
course compounds into principal and and
on it goes. But I do need the couch.
Offering a payment plan that is super
simple, super transparent. The costs are
spelled out. Cannot change
is pretty attractive and merchants would
place those offers on their site and
promptly see increments of 20 30% more
sales and so that the product sold
itself. the experience you had, the 0%
one, is especially compelling. What
really obviously no one invented sort of
free money in the future. What's really
going on here is the merchant said, "If
you paid interest, it would cost you
this many dollars. How about I use that
as an incentive for you to transact? I'm
not going to give you a 10% discount or
15% discount, sort of standard retail
enticement. Instead, I will turn that
those dollars into essentially making
that deal interest free. Part of what we
were hitting on, what we hit on 12, 13,
15 years ago when we started thinking
about this product was this distaste for
0% but an asterisk. This idea that 0% in
consumer finance is definitely not a 0%
was a huge motivator. What I really
wanted to prove to the world that there
is a way to build a product where what
you see is what you get. And so both
merchants and consumers really latched
onto this idea of honest financial
products and uh we were there.
>> So how do you make your money?
>> Exactly as it sounds. In the world of
merchants paying your interest, they
will pay us slightly more and we get to
keep that. In a world of consumers
paying interest, we will tell you
exactly how much of that interest we
get. Um it's not free to run this
business. We are not a bank. So we have
to borrow money or finance our loan book
somewhere. So there's cost of that.
There's cost of servicing. Not everybody
is able to pay their bills perfectly on
time. We don't charge late fees which
means we lose money which you know by
the way that aligns us perfectly with
our consumers. We don't want to lend
money if we suspect there's a chance for
you being late or not being able to pay
you back. But bad things do happen to
good people sometimes and so on. But
it's a very simple business. Every loan
has to be profitable. That means we have
to be good at underwriting. That means
we have to be honest and tell folks that
should not be borrowing money right now,
hey, you shouldn't borrow. We're not
going to be willing to give you a loan.
And if on average, every loan you make
ultimately does pay you back with a
little extra, it's just a matter of time
until the extras add up to more than
your fixed cost, at which point the
company becomes profitable. And you can
adjust it for gap principles. So things
like stockbased compensation and
amorization of various non-cash expenses
need to be folded in but at some point
you hit the scale where it is profitable
and that you know it it it also kind of
requires you to be pretty good at math
if you're running a lending company and
so we are naturally pretty good at
forecasting
>> a key part of that math problem uh is
your gross merchandise volume I think
that's technical term is really the
total dollar amount of transactions
processed on the platform has been
growing dramatically right and you you
got more merchants on there. You've been
getting into debit card and I want to
get more into that, but the business has
just really been uh taking off. Um, one
of the we've talked about the importance
of being partnered with merchants. One
of the big wins early on was with
Walmart, but then you know another kind
of challenge for 2025 was uh one of your
competitors, CLA, ahead of their IPO,
they got to deal with Walmart. You're
being phased out there. And I'm curious
how that affects the business. Is you do
that math problem? Uh, is this going to
be a major concern going forward?
>> You know, I think the numbers speak for
themselves. um we have all but been
phased out at Walmart and we've had a
wonderful relationship with them and
have nothing but great things to say
about the management team there and
certainly the people we worked with up
and down the development group but it's
certainly their set of decisions to to
make
just given what we have been able to
show growthwise
on our own here I don't think it's
proven to be a
major concern for the business itself.
>> I think Walmart I think you guys have
said that Walmart accounted for maybe
about 2% of your adjusted operating
income at one point.
>> That's about right. Um the
one of the things that you sort of
alluded to and probably sort of
dovetales need neatly to this question.
We do have a debit card that we
launched.
>> Yeah.
>> The debit card is pretty cool. It's it's
a really special product. It basically
has two modes. It allows you to say I am
going to use So back to the burrito
question. If you have the Affirm debit
card, you can connect it to your
existing checking account wherever you
bank. You can also connect it to an
Affirm account that we're happy to
create for you. But it works with just
about any regular bank where if you
swipe the Affirm card and you say, "Not
going to do anything, just swipe." It
will charge that transaction against
that existing connecting account. So if
you're buying a burrito, I strongly
encourage you to use that mode. If
you're going to borrow money, if you'd
like to borrow money, you go into the
affirm app and you say, "Hey, my next
transaction at retailer X is going to be
a loan." You go through the same set of
disclosures. You do exactly the same
thing I described before where you see
the plans. You choose the length of time
you want to play pay us back. You see
your interest rate if any. You agree and
the card is ready. And then you can go
to any retailer including Walmart where
even though the direct integration is
changing, your debit card will still
work. That's another way we are
available to just about anyone who wants
to use a firm and qualifies for our
products.
>> One of the key things, the key parts of
the credit card industry is credit
score. It affects if you can get a
credit card, what your interest rates
will be and stuff like that. One of the
things that a firm is really different
from their credit card industry is the
data used to create that credit profile,
who how you're going to who you're going
to underwrite. Um, I'm interested in
that because you're using AI for that.
You've talked about testing a new
metric, uh, cash flow. Why are you
experimenting with this? Why is that
data so important for your business?
>> That goes all the way back to the origin
story again. My credit score had not
changed. Just hadn't caught up. In fact,
>> hadn't caught up with you yet, right?
Still,
>> well, it also got dinged by my credit
card experience in college. And so, I
was entirely not well represented by my
credit score. If you look at my credit
history, you would see had one credit
card, managed to go very delinquent, not
a good risk. And yet, I certainly was
great. I had a company I started which
was wellunded. We took it public. And
so,
a question that's always been in my
head, how can we do better? The short
answer is well if we knew we the credit
scoring universe that Max had done
pretty well for himself that he had a
solid salary that he had you know some
reasonably good uh stock option
participations in in this company
perhaps I would have been eligible for
all sorts of credit products and as we
started a firm we basically asked
ourselves can we reinvent the credit
scoring system if we had focused on the
real person under
the credit profile instead of just
relying on a good good old score that by
the way really calcified around the 80s
and so that's where our own the idea of
building our own credit scoring system
process multiple approaches we
definitely use a tremendous amount of
machine learning and artificial
intelligence in it also do very much
love the idea of building a credit score
on top of your personal cash flow so
it's a little bit more than just looking
at what it is you're bringing in every
month it's also trying to understand
what it you're spending every month.
That data used to be very hard to come
by. These days with modern technology,
it's a little bit easier to come by.
With your permission, we'll look at it.
Very often, it allows us to shape a view
of your personal finances that is vastly
different from what the sort of
canonical credit scores will tell you
and therefore give you more credit. And
so, that's a great tool for us to
continue growing our business. I mean,
one of the concerns out there with this
industry, buy now, pay later, just in
general, is that it seems to target kind
of customers who conventional credit
cards would see as high risk. Uh, it
it's appealing to people who perhaps are
novice users, young people. Um, there's
concerns that maybe they don't they're
getting in over their head, right? I
think of lots of headlines out there. My
colleagues had a story recently. The
headline was, "A generation is turning
to buy now pay later for Botox and
concert tickets."
uh you know there's some concerns out
there. You were once one of these young
people who didn't understand credit.
What do you think about these kind of
cautionary tales that are just so
plentiful right now? So the as much as
we all can laugh and mock the oh gosh
they're financing burritos. When you put
your credit card down at your favorite
burrito, you are financing that burrito
too. You may be personally paying it off
at the end of the month. Yeah. But half
the country is paying interest to their
credit card provider. That burrito gets
right on top of that pile and
immediately starts acrewing interest for
which you will pay and pay and pay
potentially until the day you die. And
so the sort of a oh gosh, a new way to
borrow money. Let's stick with the old
one because it's better is pretty
disingenuous. For most people it is not
better. For most people, it's actually I
just don't understand it, but it's
always been here and so maybe I could
just stick with that. That's what these
articles, that's what that's what these
stories say. The reason by now pay later
is a better alternative is because it is
transparent. Now, you can worry, well,
they'll use this and this. It's all
going to pile together and then we'll
just have more debt. That that's a much
more sophisticated way of expressing
this concern, which is why what we do at
a firm is different in a very specific
ways that it is. The reason we don't
charge late fees is not just because it
makes for a great story, although I
think that is a genuinely good one. It's
because it aligns us with the borrower.
Credit card industry makes almost half
the profits from late fees because they
don't actually mind if you're late. In
fact, they would prefer you sat on a
$10,000 pile of debt, revolved forever
and ever, paid minimum payments, and
created a cash flow stream for the
lender. With a firm, you are not allowed
to revolve. You cannot stay in any more
debt than what we have planned out for
you on any given month. If you are
behind, you are delinquent and we will
not lend to you again until you cure, as
they say in the industry, until you
basically catch up.
>> So clearly a key part of the company,
clear part of uh your success is that AI
uh helping you pick who you're going to
lend to and kind of managing that
relationship. I think of really a firm
as being an AI company long before it
was cool to be saying AI, right? How do
you see AI kind of changing the shopping
experience in the next decade? Right? I
mean, we've seen this big change over
the last generation, keyword search at
Google or Amazon, uh, kind of the
consumer gets on there and kind of
clearly says what they're looking for,
something comes back from search, right?
the threat of AI is that a new way
emerges of shopping digitally at least
and how how are you thinking about that?
Where do you play in that space?
>> So that's an incredibly interesting area
and the short answer is no one knows.
It's going to be a really really
interesting ride from here to the next
iteration of product search which is
exactly what you're hitting on. The the
thing that's both amazing and
threatening to some players and exciting
to others is this idea that we are
rapidly getting to a place where you
could talk to a robot that is capable of
doing web searches and reading reviews
written by humans and other robots to
describe actual product experiences. And
so the notion of I am going to buy a TV,
but I want it to fit my room and I kind
of want to visualize what it looks like
when I hang it on my wall. And also I
really want to know if it supports my
favorite sound system that I already
have or sound system that I'm thinking
about. And on and on and on it goes.
Used to be this painstaking process. I,
you know, I'm a bit of an electronics
nerd. I would wake up on Saturday
morning, sit down and do my research and
decide what my next sort of electronics
upgrade will look like. I think it's
going to become a lot easier. It's
already a lot easier. I can have a deep
conversation with the chatbot of my
choice and tell it, hey, go on the web
and research who's got the best
standards compliant TV and by the way, I
would like it on sale and I want it to
be shippable and kind of want it before
the Super Bowl party and so on and on
and on and on. That is going to become
already is becoming a really important
new way within that. I actually think
we're going to pick up an incredible
boost for a firm and products that live
in that same ecosystem of transparency
is better. As you're chatting with the
chatbot, the chatbot's responsibility
from our point of view, of course, and
we're working very hard to make sure
this responsibility is becomes a reality
to tell you, by the way, this TV is
available to you in 12 installments at
this exact price. I already know what a
firm thinks of you as a borrower. I have
gone to a firm and found out exactly
what this will cost you on a monthly
basis. By the way, they have no late
fees, no deferred interest, no gimmicks.
The cool thing about these tools, which
is sort of what what gets me out of bed
every morning. I've always thought it
should include at least 5% of the time
spent on figuring out what is the plan
to pay for this. AI can take that burden
off our hands and we'll be there for it.
you'll be in the in the queue there.
What what's it I'm curious just hearing
you talk about all these ideas. I mean,
what's it like to be an entrepreneur in
this era of AI? I heard you talk about a
framework that you used several years
ago when you were thinking about the
internet and and social and how this was
going to be taking off perhaps and you
kind of use this framework of humans
[snorts] are wired to sin.
>> The internet is becoming social. Social
interactions are fundamentally
sin driven. So I wrote down seven deadly
sins and that I'm going to start a
company or fund a company for every sin.
So I'm curious, what's your framework
for what AI might be able to create for
businesses going forward?
>> You know, I'm still working on the exact
framework and amazing memory andor
archaeological skills to uh uncover my
uh a startup for every sin framework
back in the day. In the world of AI, I
think
the new framework actually may go back
to what I thought
leaving college. So when I when I
graduate
with with my uh meager bachelor's degree
in computer science, I was struck by the
fact that when I entered school, storage
was still denominated in floppy discs,
which was sort of a stunning
thing. If you look back 30 years now,
like a notion of a disc with a megabyte
of data on it is such a joke. We have
little tiny pieces of metal that have a
terabyte on it like it's no big deal. So
the thought that I had in my early 20s
was data is this neverending commodity.
It's the thing we will never run out of.
In fact, every time we move, every time
we breathe, we're just generating
infinite amounts of data. And that's why
we need so much storage. And for a long
time that seemed like this sort of
abstract notion, you know, nothing to do
with anything. In the day of AI, now we
are constantly talking about how we're
running out of training data. We're not
running out of training data. We're
generating more training data than we
know what to do with. We're just not
storing it. We're not capturing it. And
so data is everything is probably the
the shortorthhand I have for the the
moment of today. We're not yet fully
aware of what makes data more or less
valuable. And so maybe we should just be
capturing all of it.
>> Well, Max, this has been fun. I hope
it's been valuable. Uh, I hope you come
back. Thank you for the time. Thank you
so much.